---
layout: post
title: "Shepherd (v0.3.1)"
desc: "What's new in Shepherd v0.3.1 and what's it actually about."
---
# Shewhat?

Shepherd is a little command-line program that let's you know how your projects are doing, like how many files/lines more there are and so-on.

# Few bytes about

Source code can be found at [GitHub](http://github.com/semahawk/shepherd), issues page [right there](http://github.com/semahawk/shepherd/issues), to create a new one [click me](http://github.com/semahawk/shepherd/issues/new), here is shortcut to [changelog](http://github.com/semahawk/shepherd/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md). As it is a __gem__ you can also find it at [RubyGems](http://rubygems.org/gems/shepherd).

Shepherd is licensed under the MIT License, 2012 by this guy called Szymon Urbaś.

# Usage

The executable is called `shep`. If you run it w/o any parameters it will print help. The same result can be obtained by running `shep --help`. If you needed a help with a certain command, just run `shep command --help`.

# Installing

Shepherd is a gem, so the following should do the job.

    gem install shepherd

If you're not using [RVM](http://rvm.beginrescueend.com/) (shame on you! it's superious!), you might have to run it as root.

# Getting started!

## Init

For first you would have to let Shepherd know which projects you want to look after/take care of/check/whatever I should call it.

To achieve this perform the following:

    cd path/to/the/project
    shep init

This will init a project called `project` (just like the most-top dir is) which lives in `path/to/the/project`.

You can also specify a path to the project (so there is no need to `cd` there) like this:

    shep init --path your/projects/home

That will init a project with a name `home`. To change the name at the init point:

    shep init [--path PATH] --name Project

The `init` command should output something like this:

    Our brave-hearted Shepherd gained a new sheep!
    
       path: /home/user/code/my/awsum/project
       name: project
    
      state: 20 files
             1.378 lines
             71.415 chars
    
             88 KB (90.342 bytes)

If you don't want any string to be outputted just simply pass the `--quiet` (short: `-q`) option.

## List

To list all projects you've `init`ed, run `shep list`. It will print output in a following format:

    ID. NAME in PATH
        COUNT files - COUNT lines - COUNT chars
        COUNT KB/MB/.. (COUNT bytes)

If you pass `--one-line` argument, it will look just like this:

    ID. NAME in PATH

## Show

To see a current state of a specific project run `shep show <project>`. It will print an output in a following format:

    
        id: ID
      name: NAME
      path: PATH
    
     state: COUNT files
            COUNT lines
            COUNT chars
    
            COUNT KB/MB/.. (COUNT bytes)
    
     initialized at YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS
         updated at YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS

"initialized at" tells us when you inited the project, "updated at" tells us when did you last run `shep update`. But we'll talk about it later.

`shep show` just simply shows, how many files/lines/.. there are. To see how many more/less there is, use `shep check` command.

## Check

If a current state of the project is exactly the same as it was when you ran `init`/`update`, the output of `shep check <project>` will look like this:

       name: NAME from PATH
    
      state: COUNT files
             COUNT lines
             COUNT chars 
    
             COUNT KB/MB/..
    
      since: YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS

__Note:__ "since" is the same as "updated at" in `show` command.

If you actually have made some changes to a project, let's say you added 28 characters in a new line, you should really get to work, and the output will look something like this:

       name: fish from /home/deep/ocean 
    
      state: 20 files
             1.420 lines (1.419 + 1)
             83.549 chars (83.521 + 29)
    
             93 KB (93 KB + 29 B)
    
      since: 2012-01-12 14:43:12

I think it's quite self-explanatory. It's not? Uhm, ok.. Line `83.549 chars (83.521 + 29)` in human language would be written like this: `new number of chars (old number of lines + number of new lines)`. If you deleted some things, quite simillar thing will show up.

## Update

This command will simply update data in the database.

## Rename

That's a new feature in version 0.3.1. It allows to rename a project. Usage:

    shep rename <oldname> <newname>

## Remove

To remove a project, run `shep rm <project>`.

# Contributing

If you want to contribute, just fork the repo on GitHub, start your branch, hack, hack, commit, hack, commit, and when you're happy with the changes - send me a pull request. Any ideas are welcome!

# Epilogue

Well, that seems to be it. If you have any questions don't hesitate to [email](mailto:semahawk@hush.ai) me. If you found a bug, please create a [new issue](http://github.com/semahawk/shepherd/issues/new).
